Improving Intergroup Relations with Extended Contact among Young Children: Mediation by Intergroup Empathy and Moderation by Direct Intergroup Contact

LORIS VEZZALI, MILES HEWSTONE, DORA CAPOZZA, ELENA TRIFILETTI and GIAN ANTONIO DI BERNARDO

ABSTRACT
A correlational study investigated extended contact as a strategy to improve outgroup attitudes and
stereotyping and to prepare children for future contact. Additional aims were to investigate when
and why the effects of extended contact occur. In particular, intergroup empathy was tested as a
mediator and direct contact (i.e. cross-group friendship) as a moderator of extended contact.
Participants were Italian and immigrant elementary school children. Results showed that extended contact was
associated with improved intergroup empathy, which, in turn, was associated with more positive
outgroup attitudes, stereotypes and behavioural intentions. These effects were significant only among
participants with a low or moderate level of direct contact. The theoretical and practical implications
of findings are discussed. Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Decades of research have consistently demonstrated that direct (i.e. face-to-face) intergroup
contact is an extremely useful strategy for reducing prejudice (Allport, 1954;
Hodson & Hewstone, 2013). Despite their effectiveness, however, strategies based on
face-to-face contact have important limitations. First, they are unlikely to be implemented
in segregated contexts or, in any case, where there are few opportunities for contact
(Turner, Hewstone, Voci, Paolini, & Christ, 2007). Second, contact is generally less effective
for minorities than for majorities (Tropp & Pettigrew, 2005). These limitations can be
overcome by focusing on indirect contact strategies, such as extended contact (Wright,
Aron, McLaughlin-Volpe, & Ropp, 1997). The aim of this study is to investigate whether,
when and how extended contact improves outgroup attitudes and behavioural intentions
among children. In fact, although there is a wide literature on extended contact among
adults, only few studies examined extended contact in young samples. It is therefore important
to test whether extended contact works similarly for children as for adults. Because
intergroup experiences during childhood serve as building blocks for the formation of
outgroup attitudes and consequently outgroup behaviour and intergroup relations among
adults (Abrams & Killen, 2014), and because schools are an ideal context for running
prejudice-reduction interventions (Cameron & Turner, in press), we believe that investigating
possible ways to improve outgroup attitudes in educational contexts among children
should be a priority for psychologists (Turner & Cameron, 2016).
To assess predicted effects, we consider outgroup attitudes and stereotypes as well as intentions
to have contact with outgroup members in the future. We examine direct contact
as a moderator of extended contact effects, because previous work has shown that extended
contact is most effective when prior direct contact is low (Christ et al., 2010). Moreover,
we evaluate intergroup empathy as a new mediator of extended contact. We are not
aware of any study testing the effects of extended contact on outgroup attitudes, stereotypes
and behavioural intentions among both majority and minority group children.

THE EXTENDED CONTACT HYPOTHESIS
According to the extended contact hypothesis (Wright et al., 1997), merely knowing that
an ingroup member has a close relationship with one or more outgroup members can reduce
prejudice. Extended contact has several advantages over direct contact (Turner,
Hewstone, Voci, et al., 2007; Wright et al., 1997). First, for extended contact to work, individuals
do not need to personally know an outgroup member; rather, it is sufficient that
they are exposed to a friendly relation between at least one ingroup and one outgroup
member. Second, to the extent that group membership is more likely to be salient to an observer
than to a person directly involved in contact, generalization of positive attitudes is
favoured (Brown & Hewstone, 2005). Third, observing an intergroup encounter rather
than taking active part in it should evoke less intergroup anxiety, which has been shown
to produce detrimental effects on intergroup relations (Stephan, 2014).
A recent extensive review by Vezzali, Hewstone, Capozza, Giovannini and Wölfer
(2014) revealed widespread effects of extended contact across several outcome variables,
target-groups, contexts and age-groups. Notably, in contrast to direct contact, extended
contact is equally effective for both majority and minority members (Turner, Hewstone,
& Voci, 2007; see Vezzali et al., 2014). Despite the increasing interest in the effects of extended
contact, however, few studies have investigated its effects among children. The only experimental
test of extended contact among children of which we are aware was
conducted by Vezzali, Stathi, Giovannini, Capozza and Visintin (2015). They asked Italian
elementary and high-school children to work in small ethnically homogeneous groups with
the cover story of competing for the best essay on cross-group friendships. By this means,
children exchanged information on their friendships with outgroup members (represented
by immigrants). Results revealed that the intervention increased the number of participants’
outgroup friends three months after the intervention, an effect sequentially mediated
by ingroup and outgroup norms, and by intentions to have contact with outgroup members
(assessed one week after the intervention).
Additional evidence comes from two cross-sectional studies. In the first, Vezzali,
Giovannini and Capozza (2012) examined the effects of extended contact among Italian
elementary school children. Their results revealed that extended contact (number of immigrant
friends of participants’ best ingroup friend) was associated with reduced implicit
prejudice, but only among those with fewer immigrant friends of their own. Pahlke, Bigler
and Suizzo (2012) examined White preschool children and operationalized extended contact
as the number of friends from minority groups reported by children’s mothers. Results
revealed that extended contact via mothers was associated with improved outgroup attitudes,
over and above the effects of amount of cultural diversity in the children’s school
and in the neighbourhood.
In contrast with these results, Feddes, Noack and Rutland’s (2009) longitudinal study of
German (majority) and Turkish (minority) children aged 7–11 years did not find evidence
for the effectiveness of extended contact. Their results showed that only direct cross-group
friendships, but not extended contact (number of outgroup friends of children’s three best
friends), were longitudinally associated (seven months after the first assessment) with more
positive outgroup attitudes, and only among majority children. This finding may, however,
be because of the extended contact measure used: participants were asked to report how
many of their ‘friends’ have outgroup friends, instead of reporting the number of ingroup
friends’ outgroup friends.
These prior studies, with the exception of that by Feddes et al. (2009), were conducted by
considering only children belonging to the majority group. Thus, it is of primary importance
to test extended contact by considering both majority and minority children. In the case of
minority children, a further consideration arises. In Italian schools, the number of immigrant
children in a class is often very low, which reduces the opportunity for immigrant children
to know about a fellow ingroup member (another migrant) who has outgroup friends. However,
immigrant children may well have outgroup friends, and indeed research in Italy has
found that minority members generally have a higher number of cross-group friends compared
with the majority (Vezzali, Giovannini, & Capozza, 2010), as is to be expected given
the relative proportions of each group. If minority children have friends from the majority
group, who themselves have immigrant friends, then we should also take into account this
form of extended contact, because it provides children with knowledge of ingroup and
outgroup members engaging in contact (and not merely contact, but friendship).

HOW EXTENDED CONTACT WORKS
Wright et al. (1997) proposed four mechanisms through which extended contact should
improve outgroup attitudes. First, extended contact should reduce intergroup anxiety
which, in turn, should be associated with more positive outgroup attitudes (Vezzali et al.,
2014). Second, observing a friendly interaction between an ingroup and an outgroup member
should bring the outgroup member closer to the self, and this in turn should improve
outgroup attitudes.
The third proposed mediator is ingroup norms. Because group membership should be
salient to an observer of an intergroup encounter, thus favouring the processes of selfcategorization
as group member and adherence to group norms (Jetten, Spears, &
Manstead, 1996), observing an ingroup member acting in a friendly manner with an
outgroup member can suggest that the ingroup has positive norms about intergroup
contact. Positive ingroup norms, in turn, should be associated with improved outgroup
attitudes. Outgroup norms are the fourth mechanism proposed by Wright et al. (1997).
As for ingroup norms, observing a cross-group interaction may indicate that the outgroup
is positively oriented towards intergroup contact, in turn fostering more positive attitudes
towards its members.
Turner, Hewstone, Voci and Vonofakou (2008) conducted two correlational studies
among White British and South-West Asian students in the UK that tested simultaneously
the four mediators proposed by Wright et al. (1997). Results showed that reduced intergroup
anxiety, increased IOS and perception that both ingroup and outgroup had
favourable norms towards contact mediated the relationship between extended contact
and more positive outgroup attitudes.
Other studies identified further mediators of extended contact, such as self-disclosure
(Turner, Hewstone, & Voci, 2007, Studies 2 and 3; for a review, see Vezzali et al.,
2014). However, little research has investigated the processes that mediate effects of extended
contact among children. One exception was provided by the study by Vezzali
et al. (2015), who found evidence for ingroup and outgroup norms and behavioural intentions
as the mediators of extended contact.
Given this sparse empirical evidence, we believe that it is important to examine in more
depth whether, when and how extended contact is associated with improved outgroup attitudes
in children. Based on the little evidence provided by studies conducted among children
we expect no differences in how extended contact operates among children compared
with adults (although, given the lack of studies, this is an empirical question that still needs
to be answered). In particular, we expect that affective processes (in this case, intergroup
empathy) will mediate the effects of extended contact on our dependent variables (but only
for those with low levels of direct contact, see below). This test is especially important,
given that we are not aware of any study testing mediation of extended contact effects
by affective factors among elementary schoolchildren.

THE PRESENT STUDY
The aim of the present study was to test the effectiveness of extended contact among
children. As outcome variables, we decided to assess outgroup attitudes and stereotypes
to be consistent with most of previous research. Because extended contact is considered
as a preparatory strategy for future contact, and because intentions are the most proximal
antecedent of actual behaviour (Ajzen, 1991), we also included a measure assessing the
desire to engage in contact with outgroup members. We also sought to identify when
and why the effects of the extended contact occur.
In this study, we tested for the first time intergroup empathy as a mediator of extended
contact. Empathy can be defined as the emotional response to the emotions felt by
outgroup members (Stephan & Finlay, 1999). There is an extensive literature showing that
intergroup empathy has beneficial effects on outgroup attitudes (Batson, 2010; Galinsky,
Gilin, & Massux, 2011). Moreover, intergroup empathy is a key mediator of direct contact
(Brown & Hewstone, 2005). Children start developing empathic feelings during their preschool
years (Radke-Yarrow, Zahn-Waxler, & Chapman, 1983), and research has revealed
that, as for adults, empathy in children is associated with increased prosocial behaviour
(Litvack-Miller, McDougall, & Romney, 1997). However, despite the well-established
effects of empathy in children, there is a paucity of research on intergroup empathy in this
age group.
Few studies have examined the association between empathy towards the outgroup and
outgroup attitudes. Nesdale and collaborators found, using samples of children between 5
and 12 years of age, that empathy towards outgroup members improved outgroup attitudes
(Nesdale, Griffiths, Durkin, & Maass, 2005) and reduced intergroup aggression tendencies
(Nesdale, Milliner, Duffy, & Griffiths, 2009). We hypothesized that extended contact, by
bringing outgroup members closer to the self, would facilitate the understanding of their
feelings (i.e. would be associated with increased intergroup empathy), which in turn should
be associated with improved outgroup attitudes.
To learn more about the boundary conditions that may limit the effectiveness of
extended contact, we also tested direct contact as a moderator of the hypothesized effects.
Research has shown that attitudes are stronger and more resistant to change when they are
formed on the basis of personal experiences (Fazio, Powell, & Herr, 1983), a claim confirmed
specifically for direct intergroup contact and strength of outgroup attitudes
(Vonofakou, Hewstone, & Voci, 2007). Thus, attitudes will form primarily as a function
of direct experience with an attitude object. However, if personal experiences are scarce
or unavailable, individuals will rely on indirect experiences as a source of information
for attitude formation, and over time such indirect experiences (in the form of extended
contact) are associated with stronger outgroup attitudes, but only for respondents in segregated
settings or for individuals with less experience of direct, personal contact with the
outgroup (e.g. Christ et al., 2010).
We therefore hypothesized that extended contact (indirect experience) would be used as
a source of information, and thus would be associated with more positive outgroup
attitudes, via intergroup empathy, only for those who have less direct experience of
cross-group interactions (i.e. for participants with less direct contact). In other words, we
expected a pattern of moderated mediation, where empathy is the mediator and direct
contact is the moderator. The theoretical model is shown in Figure 1.
Previous studies on extended contact conducted with young samples assessed only
mediating (e.g. Turner, Tam, Hewstone, Kenworthy, & Cairns, 2013) or moderating
(e.g. Vezzali, Giovannini, et al., 2012) processes, but to our knowledge they did not combine
mediating and moderating processes in a single design. This is however of primary
importance, both theoretically and practically, because extended contact may exert its effects
differently for different categories of people. Specifically, it is not sufficient to know
whether intergroup empathy mediates the effects of extended contact. Rather, it is important
to understand whether extended contact impacts on dependent variables depending on
one’s level of direct contact, and whether intergroup empathy plays a different role in mediating
extended contact effects depending on participants’ level of direct contact. Results
will provide indications (i) on the need to examine further mediators of extended contact
for the various levels of direct contact, and (ii) on how to conduct interventions and on
which variables to focus to improve outgroup attitudes among children varying in their
level of direct contact.

METHOD
Participants and procedure
The sample consisted of 308 children (168 males, 140 females) enrolled in mixed elementary
school classes in Northern Italy. Mean age was 10 years 5 months. Two hundred and
twenty-seven children were Italians (121 males, 106 females; mean age = 10 years
4 months; age ranged from 8 years 9 months to 11 years 11 months); 81 participants were
immigrants (47 males, 34 females; mean age = 10 years 6 months; age ranged from 8 years
11 months to 12 years 4 months). The greatest number of immigrants had Africa as their
country of origin (43.2%), followed by Asia (39.6%), Eastern Europe (16%) and South
America (1.2%). Participants completed a questionnaire during classes. The questionnaires
for Italians and immigrants were identical, except that Italians were asked about their relations
with immigrants, whereas immigrants were asked about their relations with Italians.

Measures
Direct and extended contact. Measures were adapted from Feddes et al. (2009) and
from Vezzali, Giovannini et al. (2012). To assess direct contact, participants were asked
to give the names of up to three best friends. Children were then asked to indicate whether
these friends were Italians or came from another country. Scores ranged from 0 (no
outgroup friends) to 3 (three outgroup friends). To measure extended contact, children indicated
on a 5-point scale (ranging from 1 = none to 5 = all) how many outgroup friends
their single best friend had. If the best friend was an outgroup member, then extended contact
was measured as this outgroup member’s friendships with members of the participant’s
ingroup.
Intergroup empathy. Intergroup empathy was assessed with two items adapted from
Capozza, Trifiletti, Vezzali and Favara (2013): ‘Do you understand the emotions felt by
immigrant [Italian] children?’; ‘Do you feel the same emotions felt by immigrant [Italian]
children?’. The 5-point scale was anchored by 1 (not at all) and 5 (very much). The two
items were averaged to form a composite measure of intergroup empathy (r = .38,
p<.001), with higher scores reflecting stronger empathy towards the outgroup.
Outgroup attitudes. We used a measure of social distance, adapted from Esses and
Dovidio (2002), consisting of three items assessing children’s willingness to accept an unknown
immigrant [Italian] child as a neighbour, classmate or close friend. A 5-point scale
was used, ranging from 1 (absolutely not) to 5 (absolutely yes); 3 was the mid-point
(maybe yes, maybe not). Responses were averaged across the three items to form a scale
(alpha = .85), with higher scores indicating more positive outgroup attitudes.
Outgroup stereotypes. Participants indicated how many outgroup members possessed
each of four traits (taken from Vezzali, Stathi, & Giovannini, 2012): nice (reverse-scored),
good (reverse-scored), bad, dirty. The 5-point response scale was anchored by 1 (none) and
5 (all). Items were aggregated in a single index of negative outgroup stereotypes
(alpha = .69).
Outgroup behavioural intentions. We adapted three items from Cameron and Rutland
(2006). Participants were asked to think about meeting an unknown immigrant [Italian]
child at the park and to indicate on a 5-point scale (1 = absolutely not; 5=absolutely yes;
3=maybe yes, maybe not) whether they would be happy to meet him/her, would like to
play with him/her, and would invite him/her to go and have an ice-cream together. Ratings,
reflecting more positive intended behaviour towards the outgroup, were averaged
(alpha = .80).

RESULTS
Means, standard deviations, and correlations among items are shown in Table 1. In Table 2
we present differences between Italian and immigrant children.
As shown in Table 1, both direct and extended contact were positively associated with
intergroup empathy; intergroup empathy was positively associated with our hypothesized
dependent variables. As shown in Table 2, immigrants had more direct cross-group
friends and extended contact than did Italians. Moreover, immigrants reported higher degrees
of intergroup empathy, more positive outgroup attitudes and intentions to meet
outgroup members than did Italians. In contrast, outgroup stereotypes were not very negative
and did not differ between the two groups. These findings replicate previous studies
showing that immigrants perceived intergroup relations as more positive compared to
Italians (e.g. Vezzali et al., 2010), possibly because of their greater level of intergroup
contact.

MAIN ANALYSES: MODERATED MEDIATION
To test hypotheses, we first conducted a hierarchical regression to examine whether the effects
of extended contact on intergroup empathy depended on the level of direct contact
reported by participants. Centred scores for extended and direct contact were entered in
the first step; the two-way interaction was added in the second step. In line with predictions,
the two-way interaction was significant, b =-.14, SE = .06, p<.05, Fchange (1,
304) = 5.24, p<.05. Decomposition of the interaction revealed that extended contact
was associated with higher intergroup empathy only among participants with fewer
cross-group friendships (-1 SD), b = .27, SE = .10, p<.01, or with an average level of
cross-group friendships, b = .14, SE = .06, p<.05, but not among those with more crossgroup
friends (+1 SD), b = .00, SE = .08, p = .998 (Figure 2).
Second, we conducted a series of similar hierarchical regressions, one for each dependent
variable. In each regression, intergroup empathy was entered as an additional predictor.
Results revealed that intergroup empathy was associated with outcome variables over
and above the effects of the other predictors. Specifically, intergroup empathy was associated
with improved outgroup attitudes (b = .23, SE = .04, p<.001), less negative outgroup
stereotypes (b =-.13, SE = .04, p<.001) and more positive behavioural intentions towards
the outgroup (b = .22, SE = .04, p<.001).
To test whether the hypothesized moderated mediation effects were significant, we used
the PROCESS macro for SPSS provided by Hayes (2012, Model 8).2 In line with predictions,
the moderated mediation effect was significant for all dependent variables. As can be
seen in Table 3, the indirect association of extended contact with the criterion variables via
higher intergroup empathy was significant among those with fewer cross-group friendships,
ps<.05, but not among those with more outgroup friends. The indirect effect of extended
contact was also reliable among participants with a moderate level of direct contact,
ps<.05 (Table 3).3, 4

ADDITIONAL ANALYSES: MODERATION BY PARTICIPANTS’ ETHNIC
GROUP
Replicating prior research (Vezzali et al., 2010), Italian and immigrant children differed onmost
variables (Table 2). Therefore, although not a focus of this article because we did not expect differences
in how extended contact would operate formajority and minority respondents (Vezzali
et al., 2014), we repeated the analyses presented above by testing whether ethnic group
moderated some of the effects. Given differences between Italians and immigrants, reported in
Table 2, it is important to test whether ethnic group moderates extended contact effects.
In particular, group (Italian = 1, immigrant =-1) was added to the list of predictors
(direct and extended contact); in the second step, we added the two-way interactions; in
the third step, we included the three-way interaction.
The two-way interaction between direct contact and group was significant for outgroup
attitudes (b = .15, SE = .06, p<.05, Fchange (3, 300) = 2.91, p<.05) and behavioural intentions
(b = .17, SE = .06, p<.05, Fchange (3, 300) = 2.98, p<.05), but not for negative
outgroup stereotypes. In the latter case, in fact, although the interaction term was significant
(b =-.10, SE = .05, p<.05), the portion of variance explained did not significantly
differ from the model where two-way interactions were not included (Fchange (3, 300)
= 1.42, p = .236). Decomposition of the interactions revealed that cross-group friendships
were associated with more positive behavioural intentions (b = .25, SE = .08, p<.01) and
outgroup attitudes (b = .16, SE = .08, p = .05) among Italians. In contrast, among immigrants,
the effects of cross-group friendships on behavioural intentions (b =-.10,
SE = .09, p = .265) and outgroup attitudes (b =-.13, SE = .09, p = .150) were nonsignificant.
These results are in line with previous studies showing that the effects of direct
contact are stronger for majority group members (Tropp & Pettigrew, 2005).
Supporting the contention that effects of extended contact do not differ between majority
and minority respondents (Vezzali et al., 2014), none of the two-way interaction terms
including extended contact and group reached statistical significance, ps>.309. Moreover,
the three-way interaction was not significant for either intergroup empathy or for the three
dependent variables, ps>.279.5

DISCUSSION
In this correlational study, we sought to test whether, when and how extended contact has
positive effects on outgroup attitudes, stereotypes and behavioural intentions among majority
(Italians) and minority (immigrant) elementary school children. Results of the
proposed moderated mediation model confirmed that extended contact was associated with
higher empathy which, in turn, was associated with more positive outgroup attitudes,
stereotypes and behavioural intentions. These effects were, however, only significant
among participants with a low or moderate level of direct contact.
On a theoretical level, our findings are consistent with previous studies showing beneficial
effects of extended contact in children (e.g. Vezzali, Giovannini, et al. 2012). Some
authors have suggested that extended contact can be useful as a preparatory strategy for
real group interactions (Turner, Hewstone, Voci, et al., 2007), which can be stressful
and anxiety-provoking. By increasing the desire to engage in contact with outgroup
members, extended contact should facilitate the formation of cross-group friendships
(see Vezzali et al., 2015) and, in general, yield smoother intergroup interactions. Our
findings, showing an effect on willingness to engage in contact with outgroup members,
thus support the role of this type of indirect contact as a preparatory strategy for direct
intergroup experiences.
We also reported evidence for a new mediator of extended contact: intergroup empathy.
Extending previous research conducted with adults (e.g. Galinsky et al., 2011) and children
(Nesdale et al., 2005, 2009), we demonstrated that intergroup empathy stemming
from extended contact can be pivotal in improving outgroup attitudes and stereotypes
and in promoting willingness to approach the outgroup. Future studies should examine additional
mediators of extended contact in children. There is some evidence that cognitive
mediators such as group norms (e.g. Vezzali et al., 2015), self-disclosure (Turner,
Hewstone, & Voci, 2007, Studies 2 and 3) and IOS (e.g. Turner et al., 2008, Study 2)
mediate extended contact effects in non-adult samples. However, in parallel with research
on adults, evidence for mediation of extended contact by affective factors is scarce and
mostly focused on intergroup anxiety. Future studies might examine more closely whether
other affective processes act as mediators of extended contact.
Crucially, the indirect effects of extended contact via intergroup empathy were reliable
for children with a low or moderate level of direct contact, but not for those who reported
higher levels of cross-group friendships. Thus, it seems that children rely on indirect contact
experiences (e.g. extended contact) only when they do not have sufficient direct experience
of intergroup contact. It should be noted that the fact that direct contact moderates
the effects of extended contact does not mean that the two strategies are not complementary.
Indeed, there is evidence that extended and direct contact have additive and mutually
reinforcing effects on outgroup attitudes (e.g. Turner et al., 2008). However, when direct
contact is not present, or is low, extended contact is an especially useful tool for reducing
prejudice and preparing people for successful cross-group interactions.
In our study, we proposed a moderated mediation model, combining both moderation
(i.e. direct contact) and mediation (i.e. intergroup empathy) processes in a single theoretical
model. We believe that this approach constitutes an important step in extended contact
research with children, which had previously focused on moderator and mediation processes
separately. It also has important theoretical and practical implications. For instance,
the fact that extended contact was not associated with dependent variables for participants
with high levels of direct contact does not mean that extended contact cannot be used for
individuals who already have direct contact experiences. Rather, our combined approach
suggests that intergroup empathy does not promote effects of extended contact for these
individuals. Possibly, other mediators might show effects of extended contact effects for
children high in direct contact. For instance, it is possible that, for children with positive
experience of direct contact (i.e. children with high direct contact), extended contact contributes
to enhancing a one-group representation and in turn more positive outgroup attitudes.
Future research should test this possibility.
The effects of extended contact were not, however, moderated by participants’ ethnic
group. This result is in line with prior research on extended contact in adults (e.g. Turner,
Hewstone, & Voci, 2007), showing that, in contrast to direct contact (Tropp & Pettigrew,
2005), extended contact is equally effective for both majority and minority members. Our
results represent strong evidence for the extended contact hypothesis applied to majority
and minority children, and imply that strategies based on extended contact can be successfully
used in educational contexts whether children belong to the majority or to the minority
group.
Our research extends previous literature in three major ways. First, it tests extended
contact as a strategy for improving outgroup orientations in both majority and minority
children, using various types of dependent variables. These dependent variables also
include intergroup behavioural intentions, which have rarely been tested as the outcome
of extended contact among children. Second, it sheds light on the process underlying
improvement of outgroup attitudes, by identifying a new mediator of extended contact
(i.e. intergroup empathy). Third, it examines the boundary conditions that limit the effects
of extended contact, namely level of direct contact.
Our findings have important practical implications for educational policies. Structured
interventions based on extended contact, which can be directed simultaneously to majority
and minority children, should strengthen the importance of understanding what outgroup
members feel. Enhanced intergroup empathy is then the key factor allowing the achievement
of more positive outgroup attitudes and the formation of new cross-group friendships.
New cross-group friendships can increase confidence in contact and foster a
virtuous circle where individuals seek out even more contact (Turner & Cameron,
2016). These interventions should not be carried out in isolation, but they may fruitfully
be combined with other interventions, such as those based on imagined contact (Crisp &
Turner, 2012), and can represent a pre-contact tool to be used before children belonging
to different groups have the opportunity to engage in direct, face-to-face contact.
Notwithstanding these encouraging conclusions, we acknowledge some limitations.
First, results are based on correlational data. Clearly, we now need experimental and longitudinal
data to support the new findings of this study. This is especially true because we
have included a variable (intergroup empathy) which had never been tested as a mediator
of extended contact among children. Testing mediation in correlational designs may, in
fact, be misleading (Cohen, Cohen, West, & Aiken, 2003) and mediator models would
ideally require manipulation of both independent and mediator variables in order to make
stronger causal claims (Spencer, Zanna, & Fong, 2005).
Second, as data were collected in Northern Italy with respect to the relationship between
Italian and immigrant children, we should be cautious about the generalizability of these
results to other intergroup contexts. Future research should include settings where different
minorities are present, where they are present in greater or lesser numbers, and where the
receiving society is more or less tolerant than in Italy. Third, the two items we used to
capture intergroup empathy may be too abstract for children. This may be reflected in
the moderate correlation we found between the two items. Future studies should use more
reliable and simpler measures of empathy, carefully pre-tested to ensure that they are
understood by children of the target age group.
To conclude, the present study provides further support for the extended contact hypothesis
(Wright et al., 1997). Because interventions based on direct contact are often impractical
because of factors such as segregation or low numbers of the minority, and can be
costly, we believe that it is of primary importance to advance our understanding of alternative
flexible and low-cost prejudice-reduction strategies such as extended contact.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to the Institutes Frank, Giotto and Pertini (Carpi, Modena), and to Paola
Spagnol and Margherita Righi for their collaboration in the organization of the study.
We also thank Giulia Bergamini and Valentina Amari for their help in data collection
and coding.